



Network Working Group                                     R. Wilton, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Rahman
Expires: 7 August 2026                                           Equinix
                                                               J. Clarke
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                               J. Sterne
                                                                   Nokia
                                                         3 February 2026


                             YANG Packages
                   draft-ietf-netmod-yang-packages-07

Abstract

   This document defines YANG packages; a versioned organizational
   structure used to manage schema and conformance of YANG modules as a
   cohesive set instead of individually.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 7 August 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.










Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology and Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Main Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Potential Alternative Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Open Questions/Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  The YANG Package Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  Package definition rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.2.  Schema referential completeness . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.3.  Submodules packages considerations  . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.4.  Package Mount Points  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       3.4.1.  Exclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   4.  Package Resolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.1.  Automatic Module Version Resolution . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   5.  YANG Package Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.1.  Achieving package name uniqueness . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     5.2.  Specifying modules as implemented or import-only  . . . .  16
     5.3.  Referential completeness and YANG packages  . . . . . . .  17
     5.4.  Providing Package Definitions on a Server . . . . . . . .  17
       5.4.1.  Package List  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       5.4.2.  Tree diagram  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       5.4.3.  YANG Library Package Bindings . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     5.5.  Package Instance Data Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     5.6.  YANG packages as schema for YANG instance data
           document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   6.  Package Evolution and Versioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     6.1.  Package versioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       6.1.1.  Updating a package with a new version . . . . . . . .  21
         6.1.1.1.  Non-Backwards-compatible changes  . . . . . . . .  21
         6.1.1.2.  Backwards-compatible changes  . . . . . . . . . .  22
         6.1.1.3.  Editorial changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
       6.1.2.  Guidelines for Package Versions During Package
               Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   7.  Package Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     7.1.  Resolving conflicting module versions in included
           packages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     7.2.  Handling multiple included package versions . . . . . . .  25
     7.3.  Exclusions and Deviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


     7.4.  Use of features in YANG modules and YANG packages . . . .  26
     7.5.  Use of YANG semantic versioning for YANG packages . . . .  26
     7.6.  Restrictions on the use of deviations in YANG packages  .  27
     7.7.  The relationship between packages and datastores  . . . .  27
     7.8.  Using package comparison tools  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   8.  YANG Modules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     8.1.  ietf-yang-package-types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
     8.2.  ietf-yang-package-instance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
     8.3.  ietf-yang-package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
     8.4.  ietf-yl-packages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  47
     8.5.  ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  49
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
   10. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
     10.1.  Media Type Registration for application/ypkg . . . . . .  53
   11. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
   12. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
     12.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
     12.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
   Appendix A.  Package Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
     A.1.  Basic Package Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
       A.1.1.  Example IETF Basic Types YANG package, version
               1.0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
       A.1.2.  Example IETF Basic Types YANG package, version
               1.1.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
       A.1.3.  Example IETF Network Device YANG package  . . . . . .  60
       A.1.4.  Example IETF Basic Routing YANG package . . . . . . .  63
     A.2.  Package Versioning Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  66
     A.3.  Package Resolution Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  66
       A.3.1.  Example of package import conflict resolution . . . .  66
     A.4.  Package Exclusion Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
       A.4.1.  Example of excluding modules and a mandatory
               feature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
     A.5.  Mounted Package Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73
       A.5.1.  Example of package with a mounted package . . . . . .  73
       A.5.2.  Example of an package replacing the mounted schema  .  73
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73

1.  Terminology and Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses the following terminology introduced in YANG
   Semantic Versioning [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver]:




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  YANG Semver

   This document uses the following terminology introduced in the
   Network Management Datastore Architecture [RFC8342]:

   *  datastore schema

   This document uses the following terminology introduced in the YANG
   1.1 Data Modeling Language [RFC7950]:

   *  data node

   *  schema node

   In addition, this document defines the following terminology:

   *  version (module): In the context of a YANG module, it is used as a
      short hand to reference a particular revision of a YANG module,
      potentially identified by a YANG Semver version label or a
      revision-date.

   *  version (package): In the context of a YANG package, it refers to
      a particular version of a YANG package definition, identified by
      the package version field.

   *  YANG package: a versioned organizational structure used to manage
      a set of YANG modules that collectively define a package schema.
      YANG packages are defined in Section 3.  Depending on context, the
      term 'YANG package' is often used to refer to a specific version
      of a YANG package rather than all versions of a package
      definition.

   *  package: An alternative term for 'YANG package'.

   *  backwards-compatible (BC) change: When used in the context of a
      YANG module, it follows the definition in Section 3.1.1 of
      [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-module-versioning].  When used in the
      context of a YANG package, it follows the definition in
      Section 6.1.1.2.

   *  non-backwards-compatible (NBC) change: When used in the context of
      a YANG module, it follows the definition in Section 3.1.2 of
      [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-module-versioning].  When used in the
      context of a YANG package, it follows the definition in
      Section 6.1.1.1.






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  editorial change: When used in the context of a YANG module, it
      follows the definition of an 'editorial change' in 4.4 of
      [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver].  When used in the context of a YANG
      package, it follows the definition in Section 6.1.1.3.

   *  resolved package schema: The resolved package schema is the YANG
      schema defined by a package after package resolution has been
      performed, as defined in Section 4.  The resolved package schema
      identifies the implemented modules (with any deviations applied),
      import-only modules, enabled features, and schema mount points.

   *  package schema: An alternative term for 'resolved package schema'.

   *  mandatory-feature: A YANG module feature, declared by a package
      definition as being mandatory to implement for all implementations
      that conform to the package definition.

2.  Introduction

   This document defines and describes the YANG [RFC7950] constructs
   that are used to define and use YANG packages.

   A YANG package is a versioned hierarchical organizational structure
   used to manage a set of YANG modules that collectively define a
   package schema.  For example, a YANG package could define the set of
   YANG modules required to implement an L2VPN service on a network
   device.

   YANG packages can be exported from a server, accessed as instance
   data files [RFC9195], augmented into YANG library [RFC8525], and used
   by tooling to compare and manage YANG schema.

   Examples of YANG packages are provided in the appendices.

2.1.  Main Objectives

   The main goals of YANG package definitions include, but are not
   restricted to:

   *  Providing an alternative, simplified, YANG conformance mechanism.
      Rather than conformance being performed against a set of
      individual YANG module revisions, features, and deviations,
      conformance can be more simply stated in terms of YANG packages,
      with a set of modifications (e.g. additional modules, deviations,
      or features).






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  Allowing datastore schema to be specified in a concise way rather
      than having each server explicitly list all modules, revisions,
      and features.  YANG package definitions can be defined in
      documents that are available offline, and may be accessible via a
      URL rather than requiring explicit lists of modules to be shared
      between client and server.  Hence, a YANG package must contain
      sufficient information to allow a client or server to precisely
      construct the schema associated with the package.

   *  YANG Packages should be able to represent the equivalent structure
      as YANG library, but making use of a hierarchical resolution
      mechanism.

   *  YANG Packages should be flexible enough to provide usable
      definitions representing collections of IETF YANG modules,
      OpenConfig YANG modules, and other bespoke sets of YANG modules,
      e.g., covering sets of vendor native YANG models.

   *  YANG packages should be flexible enough to represent the
      conformance and server implementations of standard or industry
      defined YANG package definitions.  E.g., it should be possible for
      a server implementation to indicate that it does not faithfully
      implement a package schema, e.g., by excluding modules,
      implementing different module versions/revisions, and/or having
      deviations applied.

   *  Tooling should be able to easily work with YANG package
      definitions to compare YANG package versions and to compare server
      conformance against expected package definitions.

   Protocol mechanisms of how clients can negotiate which YANG packages
   or YANG package versions are to be used for NETCONF/RESTCONF
   communications are outside the scope of this document.  One potential
   mechanism is defined in [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-ver-selection].

   Finally, the package definitions proposed by this document are
   intended to be relatively basic in their definition and the
   functionality that they support.  As the industry gains experience
   using YANG packages, the standard YANG mechanisms of updating, or
   augmenting YANG modules could also be used to extend the
   functionality supported by YANG packages, if required.

2.2.  Potential Alternative Mechanisms

   There are several alternative approaches to managing YANG schema.
   These include:

   *  Using YANG library, along with YANG Instance Data files [RFC9195],



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  Using git tags and version labels for modules maintained on
      github,

   *  As collections of YANG modules in a zip file or at a directory
      folder.  E.g., at time of publication, this method is used to
      represent the set of YANG modules associated with particular
      vendor release at the github repository at
      https://github.com/YangModels/yang

   Although these methods are quite simple, there are some disadvantages
   with various aspects of these methods: They are verbose, they don't
   advertise supported features or support mounts, and they can be
   awkward to compare, particularly if YANG modules haven't been
   versioned correctly.

2.3.  Open Questions/Issues

   RFC Editor, please remove this section before publication.

   All issues, along with the draft text, are currently being tracked at
   https://github.com/rgwilton/YANG-Packages-Draft/issues/

3.  The YANG Package Definition

   A YANG package is a versioned organizational structure used to manage
   a set of YANG modules that collectively define a package schema.

   Each YANG package defines:

   *  YANG package meta-data, such as "name", "version", "organization",
      "description", "complete" flag, etc.

   *  An "includes" container holding a list of included packages.  It
      also contains lists of any implemented modules and import-only
      modules that are used in addition to, or with different version/
      revisions to, the modules defined in the included packages.
      Finally, it lists required features in addition to those defined
      in included packages.

   *  An "excludes" container comprising modules and features that are
      included via the resolved packages of entries in the "includes/
      packages" list, but that are excluded from this package
      definition.  It is not possible to exclude packages.

   *  Lists of YANG packages that will be found at particular mount
      points by any server implementing this package, used in
      conjunction with mount points defined by any included packages.




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   The ietf-yang-package-types.yang module defines a grouping to specify
   the core elements of the YANG package structure that is used within
   YANG package instance data files (ietf-yang-package-instance.yang)
   and also on the server (ietf-yang-packages.yang).

   The "yang-pkg-instance" grouping in the "ietf-yang-package-types"
   YANG module has the following structure:












































Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   module: ietf-yang-package-types

     grouping yang-pkg-instance:
       +-- name            pkg-name
       +-- version         pkg-version
       +-- timestamp?      yang:date-and-time
       +-- organization?   string
       +-- contact?        string
       +-- description?    string
       +-- reference?      string
       +-- complete?       boolean
       +-- includes
       |  +-- package* [name]
       |  |  +-- name        pkg-name
       |  |  +-- version     pkg-version
       |  |  +-- location*   inet:uri
       |  +-- module* [name]
       |  |  +-- name         module-name
       |  |  +-- version      version-or-rev-date
       |  |  +-- location*    inet:uri
       |  |  +-- submodule* [name]
       |  |     +-- name        module-name
       |  |     +-- version     version-or-rev-date
       |  |     +-- location*   inet:uri
       |  +-- import-only-module* [name version]
       |  |  +-- name         module-name
       |  |  +-- version      version-or-rev-date
       |  |  +-- location*    inet:uri
       |  |  +-- submodule* [name]
       |  |     +-- name        module-name
       |  |     +-- version     version-or-rev-date
       |  |     +-- location*   inet:uri
       |  +-- features*             scoped-feature
       +-- excludes
       |  +-- module*               module-name
       |  +-- import-only-module* [name]
       |  |  +-- name       module-name
       |  |  +-- version*   version-or-rev-date
       |  +-- features*             scoped-feature
       +-- mounts* [mount-path]
          +-- mount-path          mount-ypath
          +-- package* [name]
          |  +-- name                pkg-name
          |  +-- version             pkg-version
          |  +-- location*           inet:uri
          |  +-- replaces-package*   pkg-name
          +-- parent-reference*   mount-ypath




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


3.1.  Package definition rules

   For a YANG package to be valid, it MUST conform to all the following
   rules:

   1.   Each (package name, version) pairing MUST define a globally
        unique version of that package definition.

   2.   Each YANG package has a name that SHOULD end with the suffix
        "-pkg".  The name MUST be globally unique to avoid issues with
        tools and caching, e.g., using the mechanisms specified in
        Section 5.1.

   3.   YANG packages MUST be versioned using YANG Semver,
        [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver].  Versioning YANG packages is
        further described in Section 6.1.

   4.   A YANG package MAY represent a referentially complete set of
        modules or MAY represent a set of modules with some module
        import dependencies missing, as described in Section 3.2.

   5.   Packages definitions are hierarchical because a package can
        include other packages.  There MUST NOT be any circular package
        include dependencies, i.e., packages cannot, directly or
        indirectly, include themselves.

   6.   For each module implemented by a package, only a single version/
        revision of that module MUST be implemented.  Conflicting module
        versions (e.g. from package includes) MAY be resolved explicitly
        (via "includes/modules") or using automatic module version
        resolution, as described in Section 4.1.

   7.   Multiple versions/revisions of an import-only module MAY be
        listed, but any extraneous import-only module versions SHOULD be
        removed.

   8.   A package definition MUST NOT include the same module name in
        both the 'includes/module' and 'excludes/module' lists.

   9.   A package definition MUST NOT include the same module name in
        both the 'includes/import-only-module' and 'excludes/import-
        only-module' lists.

   10.  A package definition MUST NOT include the same feature name in
        both the 'includes/features' and 'excludes/features' lists.

   11.  A package definition MUST NOT exclude a module and list features
        defined by that module in the 'includes/feature' list.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   12.  A package definition MAY include redundant information, e.g.,
        including a module or package version that is already present by
        an included package, or excluding a module that is not included
        by any included package.  However, such redundant information
        might be confusing to readers.  Although the resolved package
        definition is unambiguous, it is best to minimize redundant
        information where possible.

   13.  Finally, standard rules for YANG instance data apply.  E.g.,
        entries in the various lists MUST be unique by any list key.

3.2.  Schema referential completeness

   A YANG package may represent a schema that is 'referentially
   complete', or 'referentially incomplete', indicated in the package
   definition by the 'complete' flag.

   If all import statements in all YANG modules included in the package
   (either directly, or through included packages) can be resolved to a
   module revision defined with the YANG package definition, then the
   package is classified as being referentially complete.  Conversely,
   if one or more import statements cannot be resolved to a module
   specified as part of the package definition, then the package is
   classified as being referentially incomplete.

   Also see Section 5.3 for details on cases when referentially
   incomplete packages are helpful.

3.3.  Submodules packages considerations

   As defined in [RFC7950] and [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver], YANG
   conformance and versioning is specified in terms of particular
   revisions of YANG modules rather than for individual submodules.

   However, YANG package definitions also include the list of submodules
   included by a module, primarily to provide a location of where the
   submodule definition can be obtained from, allowing a schema to be
   fully constructed from a YANG package instance data file definition.

3.4.  Package Mount Points

   YANG Schema Mount [RFC8528] defines a mechanism for YANG modules to
   be mounted at specific mount points in the schema tree.  This
   mechanism is required to instantiate the full schema for some common
   networking use cases, e.g., [RFC8529] defines a YANG Model for
   Network Instances, that uses YANG mount points to mount IETF routing
   protocol YANG modules within the network instance list.




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   [RFC8528] declares that it provides support for mounted schema at
   "Implementation time" and "Run time", but does not cover mounting
   schema at "Design time".  YANG Package definitions do not give YANG
   language level "Design time" guarantees, but they are able to give a
   stronger "Implementation time" guarantee through the use of offline
   YANG package definitions.  They can also be used to report "Run time"
   mounted schema behaviour, if the server is able to report the
   packages implemented by the device.

   Each YANG package definition defines a set of packages that will be
   found at a particular mount point, via two mechanisms:

   *  All mounted packages that are exported from any included packages
      are also exported at the same mount point for this specific
      package, unless explicitly overridden by a mount definition in
      this package with a 'replaces-package' statement.

   *  A package definition CANNOT remove a package from a mount point,
      but it MAY add a different package version, which SHOULD be newer
      version of the package.  A package definition MAY also remove
      modules or mandatory-features.  In all cases, this is achieved by
      listing the replacement package in the 'mounts/package' list,
      which MUST import a version of the package to be replaced.

   *  Each package definition may include a list of packages found at
      each mount point.  Only a single version of any package found at a
      given mount point is allowed, and hence the version within the
      'mounts/package' list replaces any mounted version exported from
      included packages, as defined in Section 4.  In addition, the
      package mount definition allows for a package to replace one or
      more other packages at that mount point.  Examples of this are
      given in Appendix A.5.2.

3.4.1.  Exclusions

   A package definition may exclude modules or mandatory-features.  The
   mechanism for this is described in Section 4, and the conformance
   implications are described in Section 7.  [TODO - Check if this is
   the best reference.]

4.  Package Resolution

   Package resolution is taking a YANG package definition and converting
   it to a specification for a YANG schema, e.g., as may be implemented
   by a device for a particular datastore.  A YANG schema can be thought
   of as comprising:

      A set of implemented modules at specific versions,



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


      A set of import-only modules, potentially with multiple versions
      of a given module,

      A set of mandatory-features that are supported,

      A set of mount points, each with its own YANG schema,

   that can be collectively compiled into a YANG schema tree.

   The YANG schema generated by a package definition can be converted
   into an equivalent instance in YANG library [RFC8525], with Schema
   Mount [RFC8528] if mount points are used.  E.g., see Section 5.4.3.

   The following process defines how a YANG a package definition is
   resolved, using two steps:

   1.  The list of included packages are each recursively resolved using
       these steps and then the resolved package schema is combined
       using the following merge resolution rules:

       *  The set of implemented modules is the union of all implemented
          modules in the resolved included packages.  Conflicting module
          versions can be resolved automatically as per Section 4.1,
          then overwritten by any entries in the "includes/modules"
          list, and finally filtered by any entries in "excludes/
          modules" list.

       *  The set of import-only modules is the union of all import-only
          modules in the resolved included packages, updated by any
          entries in the "includes/import-only-modules" list whilst
          taking the 'replaces-version' leaf-list into account, and
          finally filtered by any entries in "excludes/import-only-
          modules" list.

       *  The set of mandatory-features is the union of the mandatory
          features in the resolved included packages, with any
          "includes/features" entries added, and any "excludes/features"
          entries removed.  If a module is excluded by "excludes/
          modules" then all features associated with that module are
          also implicitly removed.











Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       *  The set of mounts is the union of the mounts in the resolved
          included packages, where for a given mount-path that is
          present in more than one included package then it takes the
          union of the mounted packages and mount parent-references.
          The mounts are then updated by combining any entries in the
          package's "mounts" list, with any entries listed in
          "mounts/package/replaces-package" list removed (or replaced)
          at the mount point.

       *  If the same module version is being resolved from multiple
          included modules, then the union of the module locations is
          used.

       *  Submodules are ignored for resolution purposes, only the
          module version is considered and compared.

   See https://github.com/netmod-wg/yang-ver-dt/issues/258.  How to
   handle union of meta-data, locations, and override behaviours.

4.1.  Automatic Module Version Resolution

   A resolved package definition can only advertise a single version of
   a module, and hence when conflicting module versions arise though
   included packages that resolve to different versions of a given
   module then a single version has to be chosen.  The following rules
   are used, in the order given, to automatically select the chosen
   version by performing a pairwise comparison of the module versions
   from the resolved included packages, by comparing the version leaf:

   1.  If both the version leaf matches the YANG Semver format, then
       considering section 4.4 or [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver]:

       i    The module with the highest MAJOR version component is
            chosen.

       ii   Otherwise, if the MAJOR version components are the same,
            then the module with the highest MINOR version component is
            chosen.

       iii  Otherwise, the module with the highest PATCH version
            component is chosen.

       iv   Note, the _COMPAT modifier is ignored for comparison
            purposes.

   2.  If one module has a version statement that matches the YANG
       Semver format but the other does not, then the module with the
       version statement matching the YANG Semver format is chosen.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   3.  If neither module has a version statement that matches the YANG
       Semver format, then the module with the most recent revision-date
       is chosen.

5.  YANG Package Usage

   This section provides information and guidance on how YANG packages
   can be used.

   YANG packages can be defined and used for different purposes:

   *  By standards development organizations and industry organizations
      - to specify common sets of YANG data models that can be used
      together to manage network devices, or even just particular
      functionality on network devices (e.g., L3VPN services).  Since
      package definitions can be defined hierarchically, packages
      defining different functionalities can be combined together into
      larger package definitions that define more complex and complete
      behavior and YANG schema.  These package definitions may be
      published by the organizations as package files.

   *  For devices:

      -  to describe the YANG schema associated with the device or a
         datastore schema on the device.  These package schema can be
         made available both from the device and also in offline package
         files.

      -  to define different optional YANG schema that can be used by
         the device and where clients can select which YANG schema can
         be used via configuration.

      -  to refine standards based and industry packages to accurately
         report how the device does not fully conform to the package
         schema definition.

   *  To manage and report the schema available at YANG schema mounts
      points.

   It is RECOMMENDED that organizations publishing YANG modules also
   publish YANG package definition that group and version those modules
   into units of related functionality.  This increases interoperability
   by encouraging different implementations to coalesce around use the
   same collections of YANG modules versions.  Using packages also makes
   it easier to understand relationship between modules, and enables
   functionality to be described on a more abstract level than
   individual modules.




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   Where possible, package definitions SHOULD be made available offline
   in Package Instance Data files, see Section 5.5, but also on the
   device as a list of known packages and relationships between YANG
   library datastore schema and equivalent YANG package definitions,
   e.g., see Section 5.4.

5.1.  Achieving package name uniqueness

   As per Section 3.1, YANG package names are globally unique, since two
   different package definitions with the same name, but different
   content, cannot both be used together within the same package
   definition.

   There are a couple of ways of achieving this uniqueness requirement:

   *  For package definitions that define an public API, or that could
      apply to multiple servers exposing the same management API, then
      an organization prefix, and perhaps device family name, should be
      included in the package name, i.e., following a similar naming
      convention as for modules.

   *  For package definitions that are entirely local to a particular
      server or device, then the sysName of the device, a MAC address,
      or a UUID should be used as a suffix to the package name to ensure
      uniqueness.

5.2.  Specifying modules as implemented or import-only

   Some YANG modules do not define any implementable data nodes, RPCs,
   Actions, or Notifications.  These YANG modules often may include
   'types' in the name of the YANG Module.  For YANG package
   definitions, there is a choice as to whether to include these types
   modules in the packages list of implemented modules, or as import-
   only modules.  This document does not specify how these should be
   declared, but instead gives some points of consideration that may be
   helpful when choosing.  These are:

      Listing a types only module as implemented allows for simpler
      automatic module version selection between different packages, as
      per Section 4.1.

      Identities are only available for use by the server for
      implemented modules.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


      If a module defines data node and types and the server only wants
      to use the types but not implement any data nodes from the module
      then listing the module as import-only is clearer and simpler than
      marking it as implemented with a separate deviation file that
      deviates all data nodes.

      If a module imports a module at an exact revision (which, as per
      [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-module-versioning], is not recommended) then
      it may be helpful to list that module in the import-only module
      list (even if implemented) to ensure that the import dependency is
      always satisfied.

5.3.  Referential completeness and YANG packages

   Referentially incomplete packages can be used, along with locally
   scoped packages, to represent an update to a device's datastore
   schema as part of an optional software hot fix.  E.g., the base
   software is made available as a complete globally scoped package.
   The hot fix is made available as an incomplete globally scoped
   package.  A device's datastore schema can define a local package that
   implements the base software package updated with the hot fix
   package.

   Referentially incomplete packages could also be used to group sets of
   logically related modules together, but without requiring a fixed
   dependency on all imported 'types' modules (e.g., iana-if-
   types.yang), instead leaving the choice of specific revisions of
   'types' modules to be resolved when the package definition is used.

5.4.  Providing Package Definitions on a Server

5.4.1.  Package List

   A top level 'packages' container holds the list of all versions of
   all packages known to the server.  Entries in this list do not
   necessarily mean that the package is implemented by the server or
   currently active for any datastore.  Instead the YANG Library package
   bindings in Section 5.4.3 are used to indicate which of the
   advertised packages are supported by each datastore schema.

   Each list entry in '/packages/package' SHOULD list one or more URLs
   pointing to an offline location where the package definition can be
   obtained as a YANG Instance Data File.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   The '/packages/package' list MAY include multiple versions of a
   particular package.  E.g. if the server is capable of allowing
   clients to select which package versions should be used by the
   server, or if package versions have been changed via applying
   different software packages or hot fixes.

5.4.2.  Tree diagram

   The "ietf-yang-packages" YANG module has the following structure:

   module: ietf-yang-packages
     +--ro packages
        +--ro package* [name version]
           // Uses the yang-package-instance grouping defined in
           // ietf-yang-package-types.yang, with location:
           +--ro name                  pkg-name
           +--ro version               pkg-version
           ... remainder of yang-package-instance grouping ...
           +--ro location*             inet:uri

5.4.3.  YANG Library Package Bindings

   The ietf-yl-packages module augments YANG library to allow a server
   to indicate that a datastore schema is defined by a package, or a
   union of compatible packages.  Since packages can be made available
   offline in instance data files, it may be sufficient for a client to
   only check that a compatible version of the package is implemented by
   the server without fetching either the package definition (if
   previously cached), or downloading and comparing the full list of
   modules and enabled features.

   If multiple packages are listed for a datastore schema then they are
   resolved as if the packages were all directly included in a single
   package definition, following the standard package resolution rules
   in Section 4.

   This means that conflicting module versions between the listed
   packages are resolved using the automatic module version resolution
   rules in Section 4.1.  As a result, the version that wins those rules
   is selected in the resolved package schema.  This allows an extra
   'bugfix' package to be added to the list of packages defining a
   schema to provide a higher/newer module version, but it cannot be
   used to select a lower/older module version.  Instead, a wrapper
   package would need to be defined to explicitly select the older
   module version (see Section 7.1).






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   If populated, the set of packages listed for a datastore schema MUST
   resolve to a schema that exactly matches the schema defined by the
   YANG library 'schema/module-set' data node, and the resolved schema
   MUST be referentially complete.  Using YANG packages offers an
   alternative hierarchical definition of the same schema.

   The "ietf-yl-packages" YANG module has the following structure:

   module: ietf-yl-packages

     augment /yanglib:yang-library/yanglib:schema:
       +--ro package* [name version]
          +--ro name       -> /pkgs:packages/package/name
          +--ro version    leafref

5.5.  Package Instance Data Files

   YANG packages SHOULD be made available offline from the server,
   defined as YANG instance data files [RFC9195] using the schema below
   to define the package data.

   Package instance data files use the ".ypkg" file extension and the
   "application/ypkg" media type as defined in Section 10.1.

   The following rules apply to the format of the YANG package instance
   files:

   1.  The file SHOULD be encoded in JSON.

   2.  The name of the file SHOULD follow the format "<package-
       name>@<version>.json".

   3.  The package name MUST be specified in both the instance-data-set
       'name' and package 'name' leafs.

   4.  The 'description' field of the instance-data-set SHOULD be "YANG
       package definition".

   5.  The 'timestamp', "organization', 'contact' fields are defined in
       both the instance-data-set meta-data and the YANG package meta-
       data.  Package definitions SHOULD only define these fields as
       part of the package definition.  If any of these fields are
       populated in the instance-data-set meta-data then they MUST
       contain the same value as the corresponding leaves in the package
       definition.

   6.  The 'revision' list in the instance data file SHOULD NOT be used,
       since versioning is handled by the package definition.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   7.  The instance data file for each version of a YANG package SHOULD
       be made available at one of more locations accessible via URLs.
       If one of the listed locations defines a definitive reference
       implementation for the package definition then it MUST be listed
       as the first entry in the list.

   The "ietf-yang-package-instance" YANG module has the following
   structure:

   module: ietf-yang-package-instance

     structure package:
       // Uses the yang-package-instance grouping defined in
       // ietf-yang-package-types.yang
       +-- name                  pkg-name
       +-- version               pkg-version
       ... remainder of yang-package-instance grouping ...

5.6.  YANG packages as schema for YANG instance data document

   YANG package definitions can be used as the content schema definition
   for YANG instance data files.  When using a package-based content
   schema, the name and version of the package MUST be specified, a
   package URL to the package definition MAY also be provided.

   The "ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg" YANG module has the following
   structure:

module: ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg

  augment-structure /yid:instance-data-set/yid:content-schema/yid:content-schema-spec:
    +--:(pkg-schema)
      +-- pkg-schema
        +-- name        pkg-name
        +-- version     pkg-version
        +-- location*   inet:uri

6.  Package Evolution and Versioning

6.1.  Package versioning

   As defined in Section 3.1, YANG packages are versioning using
   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver].  This section describes how those
   rules apply to YANG package definitions.







Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


6.1.1.  Updating a package with a new version

   Package compatibility is fundamentally defined by how the package
   schema between two package versions has changed.

   When a package definition is updated, the version associated with the
   package MUST be updated appropriately, taking into consideration the
   scope of the changes as defined by the rules below.  See section 4.5
   of [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver] for guidance on choosing the next
   version number based on the type of change being made.

   It is important to note that a non-backwards-compatible (NBC) change
   to a package definition (generally requiring a major version number
   increment) may not always result in an NBC change to the resolved
   schema.  For example, if a package replaces a module version 1.0.0
   with version 3.0.0, but the content of version 3.0.0 has been
   reverted to be functionally identical to version 1.0.0 (effectively
   backing out previous changes between the two), the schema difference
   between the package versions may be functionally compatible.
   Nevertheless, such changes must still follow the versioning rules
   defined above based on the package definition changes, not the
   effective change before resolved schema.

6.1.1.1.  Non-Backwards-compatible changes

   Non-backwards-compatible changes to a package are those that may
   cause the resolved package schema to change in a way that can
   negatively impact clients.  E.g., the removal or change of a data
   node that was present in the previous package version, which may be
   used by client applications.

   The following changes classify as non-backwards-compatible changes to
   a package definition:

   *  Changing an 'includes/package' list entry to select a package
      version that is non-backwards-compatible to the prior package
      version, or removing a previously included package.

   *  Changing an 'includes/module' or 'includes/import-only-module'
      list entry to select a module version that is non-backwards-
      compatible to the prior module version, or removing a previously
      implemented module.

   *  Adding an entry to the 'excludes/module' list or the 'excludes/
      import-only-module' list, which in either case causes a module to
      be removed from an included package and could affect the
      conformance reporting of whether the included package is deemed as
      being implemented.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  Removing a feature from the 'includes/features' list unless the
      feature was not mandatory in any included packages.

   *  Adding a feature to the 'excludes/features' list unless the
      feature was not mandatory in any included package.

   *  Adding, changing, or removing a module containing one or more
      deviations, that when applied to the target module would create a
      change that is considered a non-backwards-compatible change to the
      affected data node in the schema associated with the prior package
      version.

   *  Removing a package from a mount point, or changing a mounted
      package to a version that is non-backwards-compatible to the prior
      package version.

6.1.1.2.  Backwards-compatible changes

   Backwards-compatible changes to a package are those that may cause
   the resolved package schema to change in a way that should not impact
   clients.  E.g., the addition of a new data node that was not present
   in the previous package version.

   The following changes classify as backwards-compatible changes to a
   package definition:

   *  Changing an 'included-package' list entry to select a package
      version that is backwards-compatible to the prior package version,
      or including a new package that does not conflict with any
      existing included package or module.

   *  Changing a 'module' or 'import-only-module' list entry to select a
      module revision that is backwards-compatible to the prior module
      revision, or including a new module to the package definition.

   *  Removing an entry to the 'excludes/module' list or the 'excludes/
      import-only-module' list.  [TODO - Do we need to consider
      deviations here, e.g., removing a deviation may change the
      schema.]

   *  Adding a feature to the 'mandatory-feature/include' leaf-list.

   *  Removing a feature to the 'mandatory-feature/exclude' leaf-list.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  Adding, changing, or removing a module containing one or more
      deviations, that when applied to the target module would create a
      change that is considered a backwards-compatible change to the
      affected data node in the schema associated with the prior package
      version.

6.1.1.3.  Editorial changes

   Editorial changes to a package are those that do not change the
   resolved package schema.

   The following changes classify as editorial changes to a package
   definition:

   *  Changing a 'included-package' list entry to select a package
      version that is classified as an editorial change relative to the
      prior package version.

   *  Changing a 'module' or 'import-only-module' list entry to select a
      module revision that is classified as an editorial change relative
      to the prior module revision.

   *  Adding a package or module to the package definition (including at
      a mount point), if that package or module version is already
      present from an included package.

   *  Updating the location information of any module or package from an
      included package.

   *  Any change to any meta-data associated with a package definition.

6.1.2.  Guidelines for Package Versions During Package Development

   During development of a new package, or while updating a previously
   released package, special care should be taken with the selection of
   the version associated with the package.

   General guidance from chapter 6 of [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver] may
   be helpful here.  [TODO - Will we provide more specific guidance in a
   separate draft for IETF YANG Packages?]











Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


7.  Package Conformance

   Better and easier conformance is a major design goal for YANG
   Packages.  YANG package conformance is similiar to how YANG [RFC7950]
   requires that servers either implement a module faithfully, or
   otherwise use deviations to indicate areas of non-conformance.
   Ulitmately, each version of a YANG package resolves, as per
   (Section 4), to a YANG schema that is defined as a set of implemented
   modules and import-only modules, devations, features, and mounted
   schema.  For YANG package conformance, it is necessary to determine
   whether an implementation faithfully conforms to the full YANG schema
   defined by a resolved YANG package.

   The YANG packaging solution is designed to allow for conformance to
   be checked at a package level, potentially using cached offline
   package definitions, rather than requiring a client to download all
   modules, revisions, and deviations from the server to ensure that the
   datastore schema used by the server is compatible with the client.

   In the case where a device does not completely conform to an standard
   or industry defined YANG package definition, then there are a few
   suggestions on how this can be handled:

   *  Automatic module version resolution rules can be used to select
      the latest module version between packages.

   *  Device specific implementation packages can be defined that 'wrap'
      standard/industry packages to accurately report the device's
      schema.

7.1.  Resolving conflicting module versions in included packages

   Sometimes a package definition may include multiple packages that
   implement different versions of a module.

   As per the package definition rules in Section 3.1, a package can
   only implement a single version of a module, and hence in cases of
   conflicting versions in included packages/modules it is necessary to
   resolve which version of the module is used.  The default behaviour,
   defined in Section 4.1 is to use automatic resolution, which is
   generally the best choice.  Manual resolution could be used to select
   a different module version instead, or even remove the module from
   the package entirely.  However, care must be taken if an older module
   version is chosen, or a new non-backwards-compatible newer version is
   chosen, because, in both cases, this may affect conformance in one of
   the included packages.





Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


7.2.  Handling multiple included package versions

   Unlike modules in a package definition, where there can only be a
   single version of a module in a resolved package definition, this
   does not apply to included packages.  As per the package resolution
   rules in Section 4, when multiple included packages define different
   versions of the same package, then both versions are retained in the
   resolved package definition.

   Instead, package and schema comparison tooling can be used to
   determine what level of package conformance has been achieved for
   each of the recursively included packages.

7.3.  Exclusions and Deviations

   Whenever possible, servers should aim to implement packages
   accurately since this maximizes interoperability for clients.
   However, if a server cannot faithfully implement a YANG package then
   it can define a new package to accurately report what it does
   implement.  The RECOMMENDED mechanism for this is to define and
   advertise a separate "server implementation" package which includes
   the package to be conformed to, and then excludes modules or selects
   different versions, adds deviation modules, and excludes mandatory-
   features to indicate the actual conformance of the server
   implementation.

   TODO, please see Appendix X for an example.

   If an implementation doesn't support any functionality in a module
   then it should exclude the module rather than using deviations to
   exclude all data nodes added by the module to the resolved schema.
   This gives a clearer indication to users of the package definition as
   to the intent.  However, be aware when combining two included
   packages, that a module removed by one package could still be readded
   by another included package.  If deviations are used this won't
   happen unless the module defining the deviations is explicitly
   removed.

   If an alternative version of a module is used then it is RECOMMENDED
   to use a newer module version, if possible, rather than an older
   version.  Selecting a backwards-compatible version is also helpful
   because it maximizes the chance that clients will be able to easily
   interoperate with the server.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


7.4.  Use of features in YANG modules and YANG packages

   The YANG language, [RFC7950] section 5.6.2, supports feature
   statements as the mechanism to make parts of a schema optional.
   Published standard YANG modules make use of appropriate feature
   statements to provide flexibility in how YANG modules may be used by
   implementations and used by YANG modules published by other
   organizations.

   YANG packages include the 'features' list, which allow the package to
   define a set of features that MUST be implemented by any conformant
   implementation of the package as a mechanism to simplify and manage
   the schema represented by a YANG package.

   TODO, see issue https://github.com/netmod-wg/yang-ver-dt/issues/273.

7.5.  Use of YANG semantic versioning for YANG packages

   Using the YANG semantic versioning scheme for package version numbers
   and module revision labels can help with conformance.  In the general
   case, clients should be able to determine the nature of changes
   between two package versions by comparing the version number.

   This usually means that a client does not have to be restricted to
   working only with servers that advertise exactly the same version of
   a package in YANG library.  Instead, reasonable clients should be
   able to interoperate with any server that supports a package version
   that is backwards compatible to version that the client is designed
   for, assuming that the client is designed to ignore operational
   values for unknown data nodes.

   For example, a client coded to support 'example-foo' package at
   version 1.0.0 should interoperate with a server implementing
   'example-foo' package at version 1.3.5, because the YANG semantic
   versioning rules require that package version 1.3.5 is backwards
   compatible to version 1.0.0.

   This also has a relevance on servers that are capable of supporting
   version selection because they need not support every version of a
   YANG package to ensure good client compatibility.  Choosing suitable
   minor versions within each major version number should generally be
   sufficient, particular if they can avoid non-backwards-compatible
   patch level changes.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


7.6.  Restrictions on the use of deviations in YANG packages

   [RFC7950] section 5.6.3 defines deviations as the mechanism to allow
   servers to indicate where they do not conform to a published YANG
   module that is being implemented.

   Organizations may wish to reuse YANG modules and YANG packages
   published by other organizations for new functionality.  Sometimes,
   they may desire to modify the published YANG modules.  However, they
   MUST NOT use deviations in an attempt to achieve this because such
   deviations cause two problems:

      They prevent implementations from reporting their own deviations
      for the same nodes.

      They fracture the ecosystem by preventing implementations from
      conforming to the standards specified by both organizations.  This
      hurts the interoperability in the YANG community, promotes
      development of disconnected functional silos, and hurts creativity
      in the market.

7.7.  The relationship between packages and datastores

   As defined by NMDA [RFC8342], each datastore has an associated
   datastore schema.  These datastore schema can be advertised by
   servers using YANG Library [RFC8525], augmented with the associated
   YANG package information, as per Section 5.4.3.  Sections 5.1 and 5.3
   of NMDA defines further constraints on the schema associated with
   datastores.  These constraints can be summarized thus:

   *  The schema for all conventional datastores is the same.

   *  The schema for non conventional configuration datastores (e.g.,
      dynamic datastores) may completely differ (i.e. no overlap at all)
      from the schema associated with the conventional configuration
      datastores, or may partially or fully overlap with the schema of
      the conventional configuration datastores.  A dynamic datastore,
      for example, may support different modules than conventional
      datastores, or may support a subset or superset of modules,
      features, or data nodes supported in the conventional
      configuration datastores.  Where a data node exists in multiple
      datastore schema it has the same type, properties and semantics.

   *  The schema for the operational datastore is intended to be a
      superset of all the configuration datastores (i.e. includes all
      the schema nodes from the conventional configuration datastores),
      but data nodes can be omitted if they cannot be accurately
      reported.  The operational datastore schema can include additional



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


      modules containing only config false data nodes, but there is no
      harm in including those modules in the configuration datastore
      schema as well.

   Given that YANG packages represent a schema, it follows that each
   datastore schema can be represented using packages.  In addition, the
   schema for most datastores on a server are often closely related.
   Given that there are many ways that a datastore schema could be
   represented using packages, the following guidance provides a
   consistent approach to help clients understand the relationship
   between the different datastore schema supported by a device (e.g.,
   which parts of the schema are common and which parts have
   differences):

   *  Any datastores (e.g., conventional configuration datastores) that
      have exactly the same datastore schema MUST use the same package
      definitions.  This is to avoid, for example, the creation of a
      'running-cfg' package and a separate 'intended-cfg' package that
      have identical schema.

   *  Common package definitions SHOULD be used for those parts of the
      datastore schema that are common between datastores, when those
      datastores do not share exactly the same datastore schema.  E.g.,
      if a substantial part of the schema is common between the
      conventional, dynamic, and operational datastores then a single
      common package can be used to describe the common parts, along
      with other packages to describe the unique parts of each datastore
      schema.

   *  YANG modules that do not contain any configuration data nodes MAY
      be included in the package for configuration datastores if that
      helps unify the package definitions.

   *  The packages for the operational datastore schema SHOULD include
      all packages for all configuration datastores, along with any
      required modules defining deviations to mark unsupported data
      nodes.  The deviations MAY be defined directly in the packages
      defining the operational datastore schema, or in separate packages
      (which may be packages attached to the datastore, or may be
      packages included by other packages).

   *  The schema for a datastore MAY be represented using a single
      package or as the union of a set of compatible packages, i.e.,
      equivalently to a set of non-conflicting packages being included
      together in an overarching package definition that relies on the
      automatic resolution of module versions.





Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   *  The resolved schema representing a datastore MUST be referentially
      complete.

7.8.  Using package comparison tools

   Clients fetch the package information from the server (if required),
   and then can use tools to generate the resolved package schema.  The
   resolved package schema may list multiple versions of the same
   package (if included with different versions), and it may list
   package versions that are not completely implemented by the device.
   By using package schema comparison, as described below, tooling can
   report on the level of conformance for each package and included
   package version advertised by the device.

   YANG package schema comparison tools (and also documentation) can be
   used to determine how closely a device implements particular YANG
   package definitions advertised by the device.  The tooling, by
   resolving the package definition, then comparing the set of module
   versions, features, deviations and mounts, can determine if the
   package schema is implemented exactly, or if the package schema is
   backwards-compatible, or non-backwards-compatible.  Tooling can
   determine if modules have been removed, mounts have been changed, or
   deviations have been applied.

8.  YANG Modules

   The YANG module definitions for the modules described in the previous
   sections.

8.1.  ietf-yang-package-types

   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-yang-package-types#0.8.0.yang"
   module ietf-yang-package-types {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-types";
     prefix "pkg-types";

     import ietf-yang-revisions {
       prefix rev;
       reference "XXXX: Updated YANG Module Revision Handling";
     }

     import ietf-yang-semver  {
       prefix ys;
       reference "XXXX: YANG Semantic Versioning";
     }

     import ietf-yang-types {



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       prefix yang;
       rev:recommended-min-date 2019-07-21;
       reference "RFC 6991bis: Common YANG Data Types.";
     }

     import ietf-inet-types {
       prefix inet;
       rev:recommended-min-date 2013-07-15;
       reference "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types.";
     }

     organization
       "IETF NETMOD (Network Modeling) Working Group";

     contact
       "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>

        Author:   Rob Wilton
                  <mailto:rwilton@cisco.com>";

     description
       "This module provides type and grouping definitions for YANG
        packages.

        Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
        the license terms contained in, the Revised BSD License set
        forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
        the RFC itself for full legal notices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL
        NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED',
        'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as
        described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119) (RFC 8174) when, and only when,
        they appear in all capitals, as shown here.";

     // RFC Ed.: update the date below with the date of RFC publication
     // and remove this note.
     // RFC Ed.: replace XXXX with actual RFC number and remove this
     // note.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


     revision 2026-01-30 {
       ys:version 0.8.0;
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX: YANG Packages";
     }


     /*
      * Typedefs
      */

     typedef pkg-name {
       type yang:yang-identifier;
       description
         "Package names are typed as YANG identifiers.";
     }

     typedef pkg-version {
       type ys:version;
       description
         "Packages are versioning using YANG Semver version labels.";
     }

     typedef module-name {
       type yang:yang-identifier;
       description
         "Module names are typed as YANG identifiers.";
     }

     typedef version-or-rev-date {
       type union {
         type rev:revision-date;
         type ys:version;
       }
       description
         "Identifies a module by YANG semantic version or revision
          date";
     }

     typedef scoped-feature {
       type string {
         pattern '[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9\-_.]*:[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9\-_.]*';
       }
       description
         "Represents a feature name scoped to a particular module,
          identified as the '<module-name>:<feature-name>', where both



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


          <module-name> and <feature-name> are YANG identifier strings,
          as defiend by Section 12 or RFC 6020.";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX, YANG Packages.";
     }

     typedef mount-ypath {
       type string;

       description
         "A path that identifies a set of data nodes in the schema tree.

         This leaf is encoded as a JSON style encoded
         instance-identifier (regardless of whether the format
         used to encode the YANG instance data), as specified in
         RFC 7951, section 6.11, except that keys are optional.

         For optional keys, the name and value of the key is
         excluded from the key list.

         TODO - Check if this definition is sufficient.";
     }

     /*
      * Groupings
      */
     grouping yang-pkg-identification-leafs {
       description
         "Parameters for identifying a specific version of a YANG
          package";

       leaf name {
         type pkg-name;
         mandatory true;
         description
           "The YANG package name.";
       }

       leaf version {
         type pkg-version;
         mandatory true;
         description
           "Uniquely identies a particular version of a YANG package.

            Follows the definition for revision labels defined in
            draft-verdt-nemod-yang-module-versioning, section XXX";
       }
     }



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


     grouping yang-pkg-exclusions {
       description
         "Parameters for excluding modules and packages from a YANG
          package definition";

       container excludes {
         description
           "Contains parameters for excluding modules and packages
            from a YANG package definition";

         leaf-list module {
           type module-name;
           description
             "Lists implemented modules, of any version, that may have
              have been brought in by included packages, but are
              explicitly excluded from this package definition.

              Excluding a module can affect the compliance and
              correctness of any included packages that expect that
              module to be implemented.

              Excluding a module also implicitly excludes any submodules
              and mandatory-features defined in the excluded module.

              It is an error to list a module in both this list and the
              'includes/module' list.";
         }

         list import-only-module {
           key "name";
           description
             "Lists import-only modules that may have have been brought
              in by included packages, but are explicitly excluded from
              this package definition.

              It is an error to list a module in both this list and the
              'includes/import-only-module' list.";

           leaf name {
             type module-name;
             mandatory true;
             description
               "The name of the import-only module to exclude some
                versions of.";
           }

           leaf-list version {
             type version-or-rev-date;



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


             description
               "Lists specific versions of the import-only module being
                 excluded.  If no versions are listed, all versions of
                 the import-only module are excluded.

                 If required, the YANG Semantic Version SHOULD be used to
                 identify the module version, otherwise the YANG module
                 revision date is used.";
           }
         }

         leaf-list features {
           type scoped-feature;
           description
             "Lists features from the mandatory-features exported by an
             included package that are reclassified as being OPTIONAL
             to support by any server implementing the package,
             overriding the behavior specified by the included package.

             Features MUST NOT be specified both in this list and also
             the 'includes/features' list.

             Features are identified using
             <module-name>:<feature-name>.";
         }
       }
     }

     grouping yang-pkg-location {
       description
         "Parameters for locating a YANG package instance";

       leaf-list location {
         type inet:uri;
         description
           "Contains a URL that represents where an instance data file
            (RFC 9195) for this YANG package can be found.

            This leaf will only be present if there is a URL available
            for retrieval of the schema for this entry.";
       }
     }

     grouping yang-pkg-instance {
       description
         "Specifies the data node for a full YANG package instance
          represented either on a server or as a YANG instance data
          document.";



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       uses yang-pkg-identification-leafs;

       leaf timestamp {
         type yang:date-and-time;
         description
           "An optional timestamp for when this package was created.
            This does not need to be unique across all versions of a
            package.";
       }

       leaf organization {
         type string;
         description "Organization responsible for this package";
       }

       leaf contact {
         type string;
         description
           "Contact information for the person or organization to whom
            queries concerning this package should be sent.";
       }

       leaf description {
         type string;
         description "Provides a description of the package";
       }

       leaf reference {
         type string;
         description "Allows for a reference for the package";
       }

       leaf complete {
         type boolean;
         default true;
         description
           "Indicates whether the schema defined by this package is
            referentially complete.  I.e. all module imports can be
            resolved to a module explicitly defined in this package or
            one of the included packages.";
       }

       container includes {
         description
           "Lists package and modules that are included in the package
            definition.";

         list package {



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


           key "name";
           description
             "An entry in this list represents a package that is
              included as part of the package definition, or to change
              the version of a descendent included package.

              An entry in this list overrides any other package version
              'included' by an included package, which can be used for
              resolving conflicting package versions from included
              packages.

              A package definition MUST resolve to including only a
              single version of any YANG package.";

           uses yang-pkg-identification-leafs;
           uses yang-pkg-location;
         }

         list module {
           key "name";
           description
             "An entry in this list represents a module that MUST be
             implemented by a server implementing this package, as per
             RFC 7950 section 5.6.5.

             A entry in this list overrides any module version
             'implemented' by an included package.";
           reference
             "RFC 7950: The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language.";

           leaf name {
             type module-name;
             mandatory true;
             description
               "The YANG module name.";
           }

           leaf version {
             type version-or-rev-date;
             mandatory true;
             description
               "Identifies the module version.  If available, the YANG
                Semantic Version SHOULD be used, otherwise the YANG
                module revision date is used.";
           }

           leaf-list location {
             type inet:uri;



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


             description
               "Contains a URL that represents the YANG schema resource
                for this module.

                This leaf will only be present if there is a URL
                available for retrieval of the schema for this entry.";
           }

           list submodule {
             key "name";
             description
               "Each entry represents one submodule within the
                parent module.";

             leaf name {
               type module-name;
               mandatory true;
               description
                 "The YANG submodule name.";
             }

             leaf version {
               type version-or-rev-date;
               mandatory true;
               description
                 "The YANG submodule revision date or YANG Semantic
                  version.

                  If the parent module include statement for this
                  submodule includes a revision date then it MUST match
                  the revision date specified here or it MUST match the
                  revision-date associated with the version specified
                  here.";
             }

             leaf-list location {
               type inet:uri;
               description
                 "Contains a URL that represents the YANG schema
                  resource for this submodule.

                  This leaf will only be present if there is a URL
                  available for retrieval of the schema for this
                  entry.";
             }
           }
         }




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


         list import-only-module {
           key "name version";
           description
             "An entry in this list indicates that the server imports
              reusable definitions from the specified revision of the
              module, but does not implement any protocol accessible
              objects from this revision.

              Multiple entries for the same module name MAY exist.
              This can occur if multiple modules import the same
              module, but specify different revision-dates in the
              import statements.";

           leaf name {
             type module-name;
             mandatory true;
             description
               "The YANG module name.";
           }

           leaf version {
             type version-or-rev-date;
             mandatory true;
             description
               "Identifies the module version.  If available, the YANG
                Semantic Version SHOULD be used, otherwise the YANG
                module revision date is used.";
           }

           leaf-list location {
             type inet:uri;
             description
               "Contains a URL that represents the YANG schema resource
                for this module.

                This leaf will only be present if there is a URL
                available for retrieval of the schema for this entry.";
           }

           list submodule {
             key "name";
             description
               "Each entry represents one submodule within the
                parent module.";

             leaf name {
               type module-name;
               mandatory true;



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


               description
                 "The YANG submodule name.";
             }

             leaf version {
               type version-or-rev-date;
               mandatory true;
               description
                 "The YANG submodule revision date or YANG Semantic
                  version.

                  If the parent module include statement for this
                  submodule includes a revision date then it MUST match
                  the revision date specified here or it MUST match the
                  revision-date associated with the version specified
                  here.";
             }

             leaf-list location {
               type inet:uri;
               description
                 "Contains a URL that represents the YANG schema resource
                  for this submodule.

                  This leaf will only be present if there is a URL
                  available for retrieval of the schema for this
                  entry.";
             }
           }
         }

         leaf-list features {
           type scoped-feature;
           description
             "Lists features from any modules included in the package
              that MUST be supported by any server implementing the
              package.

              Mandatory-features specified by any directly included
              packages MUST also be supported by server
              implementations, unless excluded by an entry in the
              'excludes/features' list, and do not need to be repeated
              in this list.

              All other features defined in modules included in the
              package are OPTIONAL to implement.

              Features are identified using



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


              <module-name>:<feature-name>.";
         }
       }

       uses yang-pkg-exclusions;

       list mounts {
         key "mount-path";
         description
           "An entry in this list represents a package that will be
            found mounted in the schema at the specified mount path.

            For a given mount path, the set of mounted package
            versions is the union of all packages mounted at the
            given mount point.  Any conflicting package versions
            MUST be explicitly resolved via an entry in the
            mounted/packages of the package definition.

            A mount path with specific keys MUST also includes any
            mounted packages without specific keys.";

         leaf "mount-path" {
           type mount-ypath;
           mandatory true;
           description
             "This path identifies a mount point in the schema.

              This leaf is encoded as a JSON style encoded
              instance-identifier (regardless of whether the format
              used to encode the YANG instance data), as specified in
              RFC 7951, section 6.11, except that keys are optional.

              For optional keys, the name and value of the key is
              excluded from the key list.

              Mount paths MUST only be used for schema mount points
              defined in the package schema.

              For example, if an example module 'ex-module' defines a
              mount point under list entry'/modules/module/' then a
              mount path of

              - '/modules/module[name=foo]' would indicate the mounted
                package schema for only the 'foo' entry in the module
                list.  Each entry in the list could have a different
                mounted schema specified.

              - '/modules/module[]' would indicate that the same



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


                mounted package schema is available for all list
                entries in the module list.";
         }

         list package {
           key "name";
           description
             "The packages that will be mounted at the specified mount
              path.

              The set of mounteed packages is the union of all packages
              mounted at the given mount by any packages in the
              'includes/package' list, except that each entry in this list
              replaces any other versions of the same package at the
              same mount point.  In addition, other package versions may
              be omitted from the mount point via the 'replaces-package'
              leaf-list.";
           uses yang-pkg-identification-leafs;
           uses yang-pkg-location;

           leaf-list replaces-package {
             type pkg-name;
             description
               "Lists other packages that have been explicitly mounted
                at the same mount point by the included package, that
                are replaced by this mounted package.

                The replacing mounted package MUST include the mounted
                package being replaced, but it may choose a different
                version that SHOULD be a later version or revision.

                Any packages or modules included by the replaced
                package are also removed by this mounted package
                unless they have also been explicitly mounted at the
                same mount point, in which case the replacing package
                MUST also explicitly include/exclude them.

                replaces-package is expected to be used if an
                implementation does not fully implement a mounted
                package and needs to apply deviations or remove
                included modules or mandatory-features.";
           }
         }

         leaf-list parent-reference {
           type mount-ypath;
           description
             "See Mount Point path and parent-reference in Schema Mount";



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

8.2.  ietf-yang-package-instance

   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-yang-package-instance#0.5.0.yang"
   module ietf-yang-package-instance {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-instance";
     prefix pkg-inst;

     import ietf-yang-semver  {
       prefix ys;
       reference "XXXX: YANG Semantic Versioning";
     }

     import ietf-yang-package-types {
       prefix pkg-types;
       ys:recommended-min-version 0.5.0;
       reference "RFC XXX: this RFC.";
     }

     import ietf-yang-structure-ext {
       prefix sx;
       reference "RFC 8791: YANG Data Structure Extensions.";
     }

     organization
       "IETF NETMOD (Network Modeling) Working Group";

     contact
       "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>

        Author:   Rob Wilton
                  <mailto:rwilton@cisco.com>";

     description
       "This module provides a definition of a YANG package, which is
        used as the content schema for an YANG instance data document specifying
        a YANG package.

        Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
        the license terms contained in, the Revised BSD License set
        forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
        the RFC itself for full legal notices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL
        NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED',
        'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as
        described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119) (RFC 8174) when, and only when,

        they appear in all capitals, as shown here.";

     // RFC Ed.: update the date below with the date of RFC publication
     // and remove this note.
     // RFC Ed.: replace XXXX with actual RFC number and remove this
     // note.
     revision 2025-03-03 {
       ys:version 0.5.0;
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX: YANG Packages";
     }


     /*
      * Top-level structure
      */

     sx:structure package {
       description
         "Defines the YANG package structure for use in a YANG instance
          data document.";

       uses pkg-types:yang-pkg-instance;
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

8.3.  ietf-yang-package






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-yang-packages#0.5.0.yang"
   module ietf-yang-packages {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-packages";
     prefix pkgs;

     import ietf-yang-revisions {
       prefix rev;
       reference "XXXX: Updated YANG Module Revision Handling";
     }

     import ietf-yang-semver  {
       prefix ys;
       reference "XXXX: YANG Semantic Versioning";
     }

     import ietf-yang-package-types {
       prefix pkg-types;
       ys:recommended-min-version 0.5.0;
       reference "RFC XXX: this RFC.";
     }

     import ietf-inet-types {

       prefix inet;
       rev:recommended-min-date 2013-07-15;
       reference "RFC 6991: Common YANG Data Types.";
     }

     organization
       "IETF NETMOD (Network Modeling) Working Group";

     contact
       "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>

        Author:   Rob Wilton
                  <mailto:rwilton@cisco.com>";

     description
       "This module defines YANG packages on a server implementation.

        Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
        the license terms contained in, the Revised BSD License set



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


        forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
        the RFC itself for full legal notices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL
        NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED',
        'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as
        described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119) (RFC 8174) when, and only when,
        they appear in all capitals, as shown here.";


     // RFC Ed.: update the date below with the date of RFC publication
     // and remove this note.
     // RFC Ed.: replace XXXX with actual RFC number and remove this
     // note.
     revision 2025-03-03 {
       ys:version 0.5.0;
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX: YANG Packages";

     }


     /*
      * Groupings
      */

     grouping yang-pkg-ref {
       description
         "Defines the leaves used to reference a single YANG package";

       leaf name {
         type leafref {
           path '/pkgs:packages/pkgs:package/pkgs:name';
         }
         description
           "The name of the references package.";
       }

       leaf version {
         type leafref {
           path '/pkgs:packages'
             + '/pkgs:package[pkgs:name = current()/../name]'



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


             + '/pkgs:version';
         }

         description
           "The version of the referenced package.";
       }

     }

     grouping yang-ds-pkg-ref {
       description
         "Defines the list used to reference a set of YANG packages that
          collectively represent a datastore schema.";

       list package {
         key "name version";

         description
           "Identifies the YANG packages that collectively defines the
            schema for the associated datastore.

            The datastore schema is defined as the union of all
            referenced packages, that MUST represent a referentially
            complete schema.


            All of the referenced packages must be compatible with no
            conflicting module versions or dependencies.";

         uses yang-pkg-ref;
       }
     }


     /*
      * Top level data nodes.
      */

     container packages {
       config false;
       description "All YANG package definitions";

       list package {
         key "name version";

         description
           "YANG package instance";




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


         uses pkg-types:yang-pkg-instance;

         leaf-list location {
           type inet:uri;
           description
             "Contains a URL that represents where an instance data file
              for this YANG package can be found.

              This leaf will only be present if there is a URL available
              for retrieval of the schema for this entry.

              If multiple locations are provided, then the first
              location in the leaf-list MUST be the definitive location
              that uniquely identifies this package";
         }

       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

8.4.  ietf-yl-packages

   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-yl-packages#0.5.0.yang"
   module ietf-yl-packages {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yl-packages";
     prefix yl-pkgs;

     import ietf-yang-revisions {
       prefix rev;
       reference "XXXX: Updated YANG Module Revision Handling";
     }

     import ietf-yang-semver  {
       prefix ys;
       reference "XXXX: YANG Semantic Versioning";
     }

     import ietf-yang-packages {
       prefix pkgs;
       ys:recommended-min-version 0.5.0;
       reference "RFC XXX: YANG Packages.";
     }

     import ietf-yang-library {
       prefix yanglib;
       rev:recommended-min-date 2019-01-04;



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       reference "RFC 8525: YANG Library";
     }

     organization
       "IETF NETMOD (Network Modeling) Working Group";

     contact
       "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>

        Author:   Rob Wilton
                  <mailto:rwilton@cisco.com>";

     description
       "This module provides defined augmentations to YANG library to
        allow a server to report YANG package information.

        Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
        the license terms contained in, the Revised BSD License set
        forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
        the RFC itself for full legal notices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL
        NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED',
        'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as
        described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119) (RFC 8174) when, and only when,

        they appear in all capitals, as shown here.";


     // RFC Ed.: update the date below with the date of RFC publication
     // and remove this note.
     // RFC Ed.: replace XXXX with actual RFC number and remove this
     // note.
     revision 2025-03-03 {
       ys:version 0.5.0;
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX: YANG Packages";



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 48]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


     }


     /*
      * Augmentations
      */

     augment "/yanglib:yang-library/yanglib:schema" {
       description
         "Allow datastore schema to be related to a set of YANG
          packages";

       uses pkgs:yang-ds-pkg-ref;
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

8.5.  ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg

   <CODE BEGINS> file "ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg#0.5.0.yang"
   module ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg";
     prefix yid-pkg;

     import ietf-yang-semver  {
       prefix ys;
       reference "XXXX: YANG Semantic Versioning";
     }

     import ietf-yang-package-types {
       prefix pkg-types;
       ys:recommended-min-version 0.5.0;
       reference "RFC XXX: this RFC.";
     }

     import ietf-yang-structure-ext {
       prefix sx;
       reference "RFC 8791: YANG Data Structure Extensions.";
     }

     import ietf-yang-instance-data {
       prefix yid;
       reference "RFC XXX: YANG Instance Data File Format.";
     }

     organization
       "IETF NETMOD (Network Modeling) Working Group";



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 49]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


     contact
       "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>

        Author:   Rob Wilton
                  <mailto:rwilton@cisco.com>";

     description
       "The module augments ietf-yang-instance-data to allow package
        definitions to be used to define content schema in YANG instance data
        documents.

        Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
        authors of the code.  All rights reserved.

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
        without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
        the license terms contained in, the Revised BSD License set
        forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
        Relating to IETF Documents
        (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).

        This version of this YANG module is part of RFC XXXX; see
        the RFC itself for full legal notices.

        The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL
        NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED',
        'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as
        described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119) (RFC 8174) when, and only when,
        they appear in all capitals, as shown here.";

     // RFC Ed.: update the date below with the date of RFC publication
     // and remove this note.
     // RFC Ed.: replace XXXX with actual RFC number and remove this
     // note.
     revision 2025-03-03 {
       ys:version 0.5.0;
       description
         "Initial revision";
       reference
         "RFC XXXX: YANG Packages";
     }

     /*
      * Augmentations
      */

     sx:augment-structure



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 50]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       "/yid:instance-data-set/yid:content-schema/yid:content-schema-spec" {
       description
         "Add package reference to instance data set schema
          specification";
       case pkg-schema {
         container pkg-schema {
           uses pkg-types:yang-pkg-identification-leafs;

           leaf-list location {
             type inet:uri;
             description
               "Contains a URL that represents where an instance data
                file for this YANG package can be found.

                This leaf will only be present if there is a URL
                available for retrieval of the schema for this entry.

                If multiple locations are provided, then the first
                location in the leaf-list MUST be the definitive
                location that uniquely identifies this package";
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

9.  Security Considerations

   TODO - Update this to more closely follow the latest template

   The YANG modules specified in this document defines a schema for data
   that is accessed by network management protocols such as NETCONF
   [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].  The lowest NETCONF layer is the
   secure transport layer, and the mandatory-to-implement secure
   transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].  The lowest RESTCONF layer
   is HTTPS, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is TLS
   [RFC5246].

   The NETCONF access control model [RFC6536] provides the means to
   restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a
   preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol
   operations and content.








Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 51]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   Similarly to YANG library [I-D.ietf-netconf-rfc7895bis], some of the
   readable data nodes in these YANG modules may be considered sensitive
   or vulnerable in some network environments.  It is thus important to
   control read access (e.g., via get, get-config, or notification) to
   these data nodes.

   One additional key different to YANG library, is that the 'ietf-yang-
   package' YANG module defines a schema to allow YANG packages to be
   defined in YANG instance data files, that are outside the security
   controls of the network management protocols.  Hence, it is important
   to also consider controlling access to these package instance data
   files to restrict access to sensitive information.

   As per the YANG library security considerations, the module, revision
   information in YANG packages may help an attacker identify the server
   capabilities and server implementations with known bugs since the set
   of YANG modules supported by a server may reveal the kind of device
   and the manufacturer of the device.  Server vulnerabilities may be
   specific to particular modules, module revisions, module features, or
   even module deviations.  For example, if a particular operation on a
   particular data node is known to cause a server to crash or
   significantly degrade device performance, then the YANG packages
   information will help an attacker identify server implementations
   with such a defect, in order to launch a denial-of-service attack on
   the device.

10.  IANA Considerations

   It is expected that a central registry of standard YANG package
   definitions is required to support this solution.

   It is unclear whether an IANA registry is also required to manage
   specific package versions.  It is highly desirable to have a specific
   canonical location, under IETF control, where the definitive YANG
   package versions can be obtained from.

   This document requests IANA to registers a URI in the "IETF XML
   Registry" [RFC3688].  Following the format in RFC 3688, the following
   registrations are requested.

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-types.yang
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A, the requested URI is an XML namespace.

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-instance.yang
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A, the requested URI is an XML namespace.




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 52]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-packages.yang
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A, the requested URI is an XML namespace.

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yl-packages.yang
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A, the requested URI is an XML namespace.

      URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg.yang
      Registrant Contact: The IESG.
      XML: N/A, the requested URI is an XML namespace.

   This document requests that the following YANG modules are added in
   the "YANG Module Names" registry [RFC6020]:

      Name: ietf-yang-package-types.yang
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-
      types.yang
      Prefix: pkg-types
      Reference: RFC XXXX

      Name: ietf-yang-package-instance.yang
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-package-
      instance.yang
      Prefix: pkg-inst
      Reference: RFC XXXX

      Name: ietf-yang-packages.yang
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-packages.yang
      Prefix: pkgs
      Reference: RFC XXXX

      Name: ietf-yl-packages.yang
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yl-packages.yang
      Prefix: yl-pkgs
      Reference: RFC XXXX

      Name: ietf-yang-inst-data-pkg.yang
      Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang-inst-data-
      pkg.yang
      Prefix: yid-pkg
      Reference: RFC XXXX

10.1.  Media Type Registration for application/ypkg

   This document requests IANA to register the following media type,
   following the procedures of [RFC6838]:




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 53]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


      Type name: application
      Subtype name: ypkg
      Required parameters: N/A
      Optional parameters: N/A
      Encoding considerations: 8bit; YANG package instance data files
      are encoded in UTF-8.
      Security considerations: See the Security Considerations section
      of RFC XXXX.
      Interoperability considerations: N/A
      Published specification: RFC XXXX
      Applications that use this media type: YANG tooling and servers
      that generate or consume YANG package instance data files.
      Additional information:
         Magic number(s): None
         File extension(s): ypkg
         Macintosh file type code(s): 'Text'
         Fragment identifiers: N/A
      Person & Email address to contact for further information: NETMOD
      WG (mailto:netmod@ietf.org)
      Intended usage: COMMON
      Restrictions on usage: N/A
      Author: IETF
      Change controller: IESG

11.  Acknowledgements

   Feedback helping shape this document has kindly been provided by Andy
   Bierman, James Cumming, Mahesh Jethanandani, Balazs Lengyel, Ladislav
   Lhotka,and Jan Lindblad.

   Bo Wu acted as a temporary editor for earlier versions of this work.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-netconf-rfc7895bis]
              Bierman, A., Bjrklund, M., Schnwlder, J., Watsen, K.,
              and R. Wilton, "YANG Library", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-ietf-netconf-rfc7895bis-07, 17 October 2018,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netconf-
              rfc7895bis-07>.









Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 54]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-data-ext]
              Bierman, A., Bjrklund, M., and K. Watsen, "YANG Data
              Structure Extensions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-netmod-yang-data-ext-05, 9 December 2019,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-data-ext-05>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-module-versioning]
              Wilton, R., Rahman, R., Lengyel, B., Clarke, J., and J.
              Sterne, "Updated YANG Module Revision Handling", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-netmod-yang-module-
              versioning-15, 18 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-module-versioning-15>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-semver]
              Clarke, J., Wilton, R., Rahman, R., Lengyel, B., Sterne,
              J., and B. Claise, "YANG Semantic Versioning", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-netmod-yang-semver-
              24, 29 September 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-semver-24>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-solutions]
              Wilton, R., "YANG Versioning Solution Overview", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-netmod-yang-
              solutions-01, 2 November 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-solutions-01>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-yang-ver-selection]
              Wilton, R., Rahman, R., Clarke, J., Sterne, J., and B. Wu,
              "YANG Schema Selection", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-netmod-yang-ver-selection-00, 17 March 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              yang-ver-selection-00>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3688]  Mealling, M., "The IETF XML Registry", BCP 81, RFC 3688,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3688, January 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3688>.






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 55]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5246, August 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5246>.

   [RFC6020]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "YANG - A Data Modeling Language for
              the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6020,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6020, October 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6020>.

   [RFC6241]  Enns, R., Ed., Bjorklund, M., Ed., Schoenwaelder, J., Ed.,
              and A. Bierman, Ed., "Network Configuration Protocol
              (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, DOI 10.17487/RFC6241, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6241>.

   [RFC6242]  Wasserman, M., "Using the NETCONF Protocol over Secure
              Shell (SSH)", RFC 6242, DOI 10.17487/RFC6242, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6242>.

   [RFC6536]  Bierman, A. and M. Bjorklund, "Network Configuration
              Protocol (NETCONF) Access Control Model", RFC 6536,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6536, March 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6536>.

   [RFC6838]  Freed, N., Klensin, J., and T. Hansen, "Media Type
              Specifications and Registration Procedures", BCP 13,
              RFC 6838, DOI 10.17487/RFC6838, January 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6838>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8040]  Bierman, A., Bjorklund, M., and K. Watsen, "RESTCONF
              Protocol", RFC 8040, DOI 10.17487/RFC8040, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8040>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8342]  Bjorklund, M., Schoenwaelder, J., Shafer, P., Watsen, K.,
              and R. Wilton, "Network Management Datastore Architecture
              (NMDA)", RFC 8342, DOI 10.17487/RFC8342, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8342>.






Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 56]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   [RFC8525]  Bierman, A., Bjorklund, M., Schoenwaelder, J., Watsen, K.,
              and R. Wilton, "YANG Library", RFC 8525,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8525, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8525>.

   [RFC8528]  Bjorklund, M. and L. Lhotka, "YANG Schema Mount",
              RFC 8528, DOI 10.17487/RFC8528, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8528>.

   [RFC8791]  Bierman, A., Bjrklund, M., and K. Watsen, "YANG Data
              Structure Extensions", RFC 8791, DOI 10.17487/RFC8791,
              June 2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8791>.

   [RFC9195]  Lengyel, B. and B. Claise, "A File Format for YANG
              Instance Data", RFC 9195, DOI 10.17487/RFC9195, February
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9195>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bierman-netmod-yang-package]
              Bierman, A., "The YANG Package Statement", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-bierman-netmod-yang-
              package-00, 6 July 2015,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-bierman-
              netmod-yang-package-00>.

   [I-D.ietf-netmod-artwork-folding]
              Watsen, K., Auerswald, E., Farrel, A., and Q. Wu,
              "Handling Long Lines in Content of Internet-Drafts and
              RFCs", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              netmod-artwork-folding-12, 20 January 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-netmod-
              artwork-folding-12>.

   [openconfigsemver]
              "Semantic Versioning for OpenConfig Models",
              <http://www.openconfig.net/docs/semver/>.

   [RFC8199]  Bogdanovic, D., Claise, B., and C. Moberg, "YANG Module
              Classification", RFC 8199, DOI 10.17487/RFC8199, July
              2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8199>.

   [RFC8529]  Berger, L., Hopps, C., Lindem, A., Bogdanovic, D., and X.
              Liu, "YANG Data Model for Network Instances", RFC 8529,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8529, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8529>.





Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 57]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


Appendix A.  Package Examples

   This section provides various examples of YANG packages, and as such
   this text is non-normative.  The purpose of the examples is to
   illustrate the file format of YANG packages, how package
   dependencies, exclusions, and package mounts work.  It does not imply
   that such packages will be defined by IETF, or which modules would be
   included in those packages even if they were defined.

A.1.  Basic Package Examples

   This section provides some simple examples of YANG package defines,
   illustrated using the instance data file format defined in
   Section 5.5.

   TODO For brevity, most examples excluding the module and package
   locations.  TODO - Probably should point to IANA instead.  Some
   examples use a shortened URL of "tiny.cc/ietf-yang" as a replacement
   for
   "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/YangModels/yang/master/standard/
   ietf/RFC"

   TODO, use an IANA reference here instead?

   TODO, line wrapping in examples.

A.1.1.  Example IETF Basic Types YANG package, version 1.0.0

   A very simple package with no dependencies on other packages that
   illustrates how a basic types package might be defined.  In this
   case, the module dependencies have been declared as import-only but
   they could also have been declared as implemented modules.



















Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 58]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-base-types-pkg%1.0.0.json"
   ========= NOTE: '\' line wrapping per BCP XX (RFC XXXX) ===========
   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-base-types-pkg",
       "description": "YANG Package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:package": {
           "name": "example-base-types-pkg",
           "version": "1.0.0",
           "timestamp": "2025-05-27T12:26:09.956687Z",
           "description": "Example package containing base IETF and IANA type modules",
           "reference": "RFC 6021, RFC 6536",
           "complete": false,
           "includes": {
             "import-only-module": [
               {
                 "name": "ietf-yang-types",
                 "version": "2010-09-24"
               },
               {
                 "name": "ietf-inet-types",
                 "version": "2010-09-24"
               },
               {
                 "name": "ietf-netconf-acm",
                 "version": "2012-02-22"
               }
             ]
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

A.1.2.  Example IETF Basic Types YANG package, version 1.1.0

   An updated version of the basic types package that includes Updated
   versions of the types modules and follows the YANG semver versioning
   rules.










Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 59]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-base-types-pkg%1.1.0.json"
   ========= NOTE: '\' line wrapping per BCP XX (RFC XXXX) ===========
   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-base-types-pkg",
       "description": "YANG Package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:package": {
           "name": "example-base-types-pkg",
           "version": "1.1.0",
           "timestamp": "2025-05-27T12:29:44.621705Z",
           "description": "Example package containing base IETF and IANA type modules",
           "reference": "RFC 6991, RFC 8341",
           "complete": false,
           "includes": {
             "import-only-module": [
               {
                 "name": "ietf-yang-types",
                 "version": "2013-07-15"
               },
               {
                 "name": "ietf-inet-types",
                 "version": "2013-07-15"
               },
               {
                 "name": "ietf-netconf-acm",
                 "version": "2018-02-14"
               }
             ]
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

A.1.3.  Example IETF Network Device YANG package

   This section provides an instance data file example of an IETF
   Network Device YANG package formatted in JSON.

   This example package is intended to represent the standard set of
   YANG modules, with import dependencies, to implement a basic network
   device without any dynamic routing or layer 2 services.  E.g., it
   includes functionality such as system information, interface and
   basic IP configuration.





Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 60]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   As for all YANG packages, all import dependencies are fully resolved.
   Because this example uses YANG modules that have been standardized
   before YANG semantic versioning, the modules are referenced by
   revision date rather than revision number.

   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-ietf-network-device-pkg.json"
   ========= NOTE: '\' line wrapping per BCP XX (RFC XXXX) ===========

   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-ietf-network-device-pkg",
       "content-schema": {
         "pkg-schema": {
            "name": "ietf-yang-package-defn-pkg",
            "version": "0.1.0"
         }
       },
       "description": "YANG package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:yang-package": {
           "name": "example-ietf-network-device-pkg",
           "version": "1.1.2",
           "timestamp": "2018-12-13T17:00:00Z",
           "organization": "IETF NETMOD Working Group",
           "contact" : "WG Web:   <http://tools.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>, \
                        WG List:  <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>",
           "description": "Example IETF network device YANG package.\
              \
              This package defines a small sample set of \
              YANG modules that could represent the basic set of \
              modules that a standard network device might be expected \
              to support.",
           "reference": "XXX, draft-rwilton-netmod-yang-packages",
           "location": [ "file://example.org/yang/packages/\
                                     ietf-network-device@v1.1.2.json" ],
           "module": [
             {
               "name": "iana-crypt-hash",
               "revision": "2014-08-06",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                   iana-crypt-hash%402014-08-06.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-system",
               "revision": "2014-08-06",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                       ietf-system%402014-08-06.yang" ],
             },



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 61]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


             {
               "name": "ietf-interfaces",
               "revision": "2018-02-20",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                   ietf-interfaces%402018-02-20.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-netconf-acm",
               "revision": "2018-02-14",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                  ietf-netconf-acm%402018-02-14.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-key-chain",
               "revision": "2017-06-15",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                      ietf-key-chain@2017-06-15.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-ip",
               "revision": "2018-02-22",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                           ietf-ip%402018-02-22.yang" ],
           }
           ],
           "import-only-module": [
             {
               "name": "ietf-yang-types",
               "revision": "2013-07-15",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                   ietf-yang-types%402013-07-15.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-inet-types",
               "revision": "2013-07-15",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                   ietf-inet-types%402013-07-15.yang" ],
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>







Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 62]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


A.1.4.  Example IETF Basic Routing YANG package

   This section provides an instance data file example of a basic IETF
   Routing YANG package formatted in JSON.

   This example package is intended to represent the standard set of
   YANG modules, with import dependencies, that builds upon the example-
   ietf-network-device YANG package to add support for basic dynamic
   routing and ACLs.

   As for all YANG packages, all import dependencies are fully resolved.
   Because this example uses YANG modules that have been standardized
   before YANG semantic versioning, they modules are referenced by
   revision date rather than revision number.  Locations have been
   excluded where they are not currently known, e.g., for YANG modules
   defined in IETF drafts.  In a normal YANG package, locations would be
   expected to be provided for all YANG modules.

   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-ietf-routing-pkg.json"
   ========== NOTE: '\' line wrapping per BCP XX (RFC XXXX) ===========

   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-ietf-routing-pkg",
       "content-schema": {
         "pkg-schema": {
            "name": "ietf-yang-package-defn-pkg",
            "version": "0.1.0"
         }
       },
       "description": "YANG package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:yang-package": {
           "name": "example-ietf-routing",
           "version": "1.3.1",
           "timestamp": "2018-12-13T17:00:00Z",
           "description": "This package defines a small sample set of \
             IETF routing YANG modules that could represent the set of \
             IETF routing functionality that a basic IP network device \
             might be expected to support.",
           "reference": "XXX, draft-rwilton-netmod-yang-packages",
           "imported-packages": [
             {
               "name": "ietf-network-device",
               "version": "1.1.2",
               "location": [ "http://example.org/yang/packages/\
                                     ietf-network-device@v1.1.2.json" ],
             }



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 63]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


           ],
           "module": [
             {
               "name": "ietf-routing",
               "revision": "2018-03-13",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                                        ietf-routing@2018-03-13.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-ipv4-unicast-routing",
               "revision": "2018-03-13",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           ietf-ipv4-unicast-routing@2018-03-13.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-ipv6-unicast-routing",
               "revision": "2018-03-13",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           ietf-ipv6-unicast-routing@2018-03-13.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-isis",
               "revision": "2018-12-11",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-interfaces-common",
               "revision": "2018-07-02",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-if-l3-vlan",
               "revision": "2017-10-30",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-routing-policy",
               "revision": "2018-10-19",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-bgp",
               "revision": "2018-05-09",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 64]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-access-control-list",
               "revision": "2018-11-06",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             }
           ],
           "import-only-module": [
             {
               "name": "ietf-routing-types",
               "revision": "2017-12-04",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           ietf-routing-types@2017-12-04.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "iana-routing-types",
               "revision": "2017-12-04",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           iana-routing-types@2017-12-04.yang" ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-bgp-types",
               "revision": "2018-05-09",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-packet-fields",
               "revision": "2018-11-06",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             },
             {
               "name": "ietf-ethertypes",
               "revision": "2018-11-06",
               "location": [ "https://tiny.cc/ietf-yang/\
                           " ],
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>





Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 65]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


A.2.  Package Versioning Examples

   This section provides examples of versioning packges.

   The examples are non-normative, and for brevity, some expected
   information (e.g., locations) are omitted.

   TODO, line wrapping in examples.

   TODO, should we also remove the instance-data wrapper around the
   examples in this section, that wwould potentially help minimize
   wrapping?

A.3.  Package Resolution Examples

   This section provides examples of package resolution.

   The examples are non-normative, and for brevity, some expected
   information (e.g., locations) are omitted.

   TODO, line wrapping in examples.

   TODO, should we also remove the instance-data wrapper around the
   examples in this section, that wwould potentially help minimize
   wrapping?

A.3.1.  Example of package import conflict resolution

   This section provides an example of how a package can resolve
   conflicting module revisions from imported packages.

   In this example, YANG package 'example-3-pkg' imports both 'example-
   import-1' and 'example-import-2' packages.  However, the two imported
   packages implement different revisions of 'example-module-A' so the
   'example-3-pkg' package selects version '1.2.3' to resolve the
   conflict.  Similarly, for import-only modules, the 'example-3-pkg'
   package does not require both revisions of example-types-module-C to
   be imported, so it indicates that it only imports revision
   '2018-11-26' and not '2018-01-01'.


   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-import-1-pkg",
       "content-schema": {
         "pkg-schema": {
            "name": "ietf-yang-package-defn-pkg",
            "version": "0.1.0"



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 66]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


         }
       },
       "description": "First imported example package",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:yang-package": {
           "name": "example-import-1",
           "version": "1.0.0",
           "reference": "XXX, draft-rwilton-netmod-yang-packages",
           "revision-date": "2018-01-01",
           "module": [
             {
               "name": "example-module-A",
               "revision": "1.0.0"
             },
             {
               "name": "example-module-B",
               "revision": "1.0.0"
             }
           ],
           "import-only-module": [
             {
               "name": "example-types-module-C",
               "revision": "2018-01-01"
             },
             {
               "name": "example-types-module-D",
               "revision": "2018-01-01"
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     }
   }

   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-import-2-pkg",
       "content-schema": {
         "pkg-schema": {
            "name": "ietf-yang-package-defn-pkg",
            "version": "0.1.0"
         }
       },
       "description": "Second imported example package",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package:yang-package": {
           "name": "example-import-2",
           "version": "2.0.0",



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 67]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


           "reference": "XXX, draft-rwilton-netmod-yang-packages",
           "revision-date": "2018-11-26",
           "module": [
             {
               "name": "example-module-A",
               "revision": "1.2.3"
             },
             {
               "name": "example-module-E",
               "revision": "1.1.0"
             }
           ],
           "import-only-module": [
             {
               "name": "example-types-module-C",
               "revision": "2018-11-26"
             },
             {
               "name": "example-types-module-D",
               "revision": "2018-11-26"
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     }
   }

   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-3-pkg",
       "content-schema": {
         "pkg-schema": {
            "name": "ietf-yang-package-defn-pkg",
            "version": "0.1.0"
         }
       },
       "description": "Importing example package",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package:yang-package": {
           "name": "example-3",
           "version": "1.0.0",
           "reference": "XXX, draft-rwilton-netmod-yang-packages",
           "revision-date": "2018-11-26",
           "included-package": [
             {
               "name": "example-import-1",
               "version": "1.0.0"
             },



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 68]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


             {
               "name": "example-import-2",
               "version": "2.0.0"
             }
           ],
           "module": [
             {
               "name": "example-module-A",
               "revision": "1.2.3"
             }
           ],
           "import-only-module": [
             {
               "name": "example-types-module-C",
               "revision": "2018-11-26",
               "replaces-revision": [ "2018-01-01 "]
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     }
   }

A.4.  Package Exclusion Examples

   This section provides examples of how to exclude modules, and
   packages in a package definition, and to remove mandatory-features.
   The examples are non-normative, and for brevity, some expected
   information (e.g., locations) are omitted.

   TODO, line wrapping in examples.

   TODO, should we also remove the instance-data wrapper around the
   examples in this section, that wwould potentially help minimize
   wrapping?

A.4.1.  Example of excluding modules and a mandatory feature

   The following example defines two YANG packages.

   The first package, "example-ab-pkg", implements two example modules,
   "example-module-a" and "example-module-b", two related types modules,
   and declares two mandatory-features.

   The second package, "example-c-pkg", imports the first package, but
   excludes the implemented "example-module-a" module, the import-only
   "example-module-b-types" module, and the mandatory feature "bar" from
   the "example-module-b" module.



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 69]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   TODO - Should that feature have been implicitly removed?

   The third figure shows the resulting schema in YANG Libary format,
   but with namespaces and locations elided for brevity.

   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-ab-pkg%0.1.0.json"
   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-ab-pkg",
       "description": "YANG Package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:package": {
           "name": "example-ab-pkg",
           "version": "0.1.0",
           "timestamp": "2025-05-29T05:55:55.774729Z",
           "description": "Example package defining modules A, B and associated types",
           "complete": false,
           "includes": {
             "module": [
               {
                 "name": "example-module-a",
                 "version": "1.0.0"
               },
               {
                 "name": "example-module-b",
                 "version": "1.1.0"
               }
             ],
             "import-only-module": [
               {
                 "name": "example-module-a-types",
                 "version": "1.0.0"
               },
               {
                 "name": "example-module-b-types",
                 "version": "1.1.0"
               }
             ],
             "features": [
               "example-module-a:foo",
               "example-module-b:bar"
             ]
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 70]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   The "example-c-pkg" Yang Package example illustrates exclusions of
   modules, import-only-modules and features.

   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-c-pkg%0.1.0.json"
   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "example-c-pkg",
       "description": "YANG Package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-package-instance:package": {
           "name": "example-c-pkg",
           "version": "0.1.0",
           "timestamp": "2025-05-29T05:55:55.817530Z",
           "description": "Example package importing A, removing B and adding C",
           "complete": false,
           "includes": {
             "package": [
               {
                 "name": "example-ab-pkg",
                 "version": "0.1.0",
                 "location": [
                   "file:///Users/rwilton/git/netmod-wg/yang-ver-dt/yang-packages/out/ExampleAbPackage/makePackage.dest/yang-pkg.json"
                 ]
               }
             ],
             "module": [
               {
                 "name": "example-module-c",
                 "version": "2.0.0"
               }
             ]
           },
           "excludes": {
             "module": [
               "example-module-b"
             ],
             "import-only-module": [
               "example-module-b-types"
             ],
             "features": [
               "example-module-b:bar"
             ]
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 71]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   The following JSON illustrates what a resulting YANG library file
   would look like once all dependencies in the "example-c-pkg" YANG
   package have been resolved.

   <CODE BEGINS> file "example-c-library%0.1.0.json"
   {
     "ietf-yang-instance-data:instance-data-set": {
       "name": "Package example-c-pkg@0.1.0 schema",
       "description": "YANG Package definition",
       "content-data": {
         "ietf-yang-library:library": {
           "module-set": [
             {
               "name": "Package example-c-pkg@0.1.0",
               "module": [
                 {
                   "name": "example-module-c",
                   "revision": "2.0.0",
                   "ietf-yang-library-semver:version": "2.0.0"
                 },
                 {
                   "name": "example-module-a",
                   "revision": "1.0.0",
                   "ietf-yang-library-semver:version": "1.0.0",
                   "feature": [
                     "foo"
                   ]
                 }
               ],
               "import-only-module": [
                 {
                   "name": "example-module-a-types",
                   "revision": "1.0.0",
                   "ietf-yang-library-semver:version": "1.0.0"
                 }
               ]
             }
           ],
           "schema": [
             {
               "name": "Package example-c-pkg@0.1.0 schema",
               "module-set": [
                 "Package example-c-pkg@0.1.0"
               ]
             }
           ],
           "content-id": "c826ea09"
         }



Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 72]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


       }
     }
   }
   <CODE ENDS>

A.5.  Mounted Package Examples

   This section provides examples of XXX when using mounted packages.
   The examples are non-normative, and for brevity, some expected
   information (e.g., locations) are omitted.

   TODO, line wrapping in examples.

   TODO, should we also remove the instance-data wrapper around the
   examples in this section, that wwould potentially help minimize
   wrapping?

A.5.1.  Example of package with a mounted package

   This example illustrates a YANG package representing a network device
   that mounts a routing package at the network-instance mount point.

   TODO - Can we use example that is the same, or very similar, to the
   network-instances example?

   TODO - Indicate that this is a minimal example to illustrate a
   concept, and leaves out some optional elements that would be expected
   in a full implementation.

A.5.2.  Example of an package replacing the mounted schema

   This example illustrates an implementation of the mounted package
   defined in XXX, but that modifies the the mounted package.

   Although this example illustrates applying deviations to the schema
   of a mounted package, the same mechanism can be used to change the
   implemented package version, remove a mounted package in its
   entirety, remove modules from a mounted package, change mandatory-
   features, change the behaviour of recursive mounts, etc.

   TODO - Probably need more than one example.

Authors' Addresses

   Robert Wilton (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Email: rwilton@cisco.com




Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 73]

Internet-Draft                YANG Packages                February 2026


   Reshad Rahman
   Equinix
   Email: reshad@yahoo.com


   Joe Clarke
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Email: jclarke@cisco.com


   Jason Sterne
   Nokia
   Email: jason.sterne@nokia.com






































Wilton, et al.            Expires 7 August 2026                [Page 74]
